>> Reporter: VENICE IS A WORLD
CLASS WONDER.
A CITY BUILT ON MORE THAN 100
SMALL ISLANDS, CONNECTED BY A
MAZE OF BRIDGES AND CANALS. THE
THE LARGEST IS THE GRAND CANAL
WITH ITS FAMOUS RIALTO BRIDGE.
OVER THE CENTURIES, VENICE HAS
STOOD THE TEST OF TIME, BUT
TODAY THIS ISLAND CITY IS UNDER
SIEGE LIKE NEVER BEFORE, FROM"
RISING" SEAS AND A "FLOOD" OF
TOURISTS.
>> THE FACT THAT WE ARE STILL
WAITING FOR ANY KIND OF SOLUTION
OF THESE PROBLEMS OF TOURISM AND
FLOODING IS DEEPLY DEPRESSING.
ALSO HOW MUCH THE WATER LEVEL
HAS RISEN.
>> Reporter: HISTORIAN MONICA
CHOJNACKA WAS BORN IN VENICE AND
PROUDLY CALLS THIS CITY HER
HOME.
>> THAT WAS THE STEP YOU GOT ON
WHEN YOU GOT OFF OF YOUR GONDOLA
OR YOUR BOAT TO GET INTO THE
HOUSE.
>> Reporter: BUT SHE'S CONCERNED
ABOUT ITS FUTURE.
>> THIS IS A STEP THAT, OF
COURSE, WHEN IT WAS BUILT WAS
NEVER DESIGNED TO BE SUBMERGED
IN WATER.
NOW IT'S ALWAYS UNDERWATER EVEN
IN THIS RELATIVELY LOW TIDE.
>> Reporter: "ACQUA ALTA,"
MEANING HIGH WATER, HAS ALWAYS
BEEN A FACT OF LIFE HERE.
SEVERAL TIMES A YEAR, HIGH TIDES
AND STORM SURGES FLOOD THE CITY,
ESPECIALLY THE FAMOUS PIAZZA SAN
MARCO.
THE WORST FLOOD OCCURRED IN
NOVEMBER 1966, WHEN THE VENICE
LAGOON ROSE MORE THAN SIX FEET
ABOVE SEA LEVEL.
AFTER THE DELUGE, THE CITY
DESIGNED AN ALERT SYSTEM WHICH
HAS KEPT PACE WITH THE TIMES.
>> WHAT HAPPENS IS WE ARE
ALERTED VIA AN APP AS WELL AS
TEXT MESSAGES AND IN ADDITION,
WE HAVE SIRENS THAT ARE BLASTED
THROUGH THE CITY.
(SIRENS WAILING)
>> Reporter: THOSE WARNING
SIRENS ARE COORDINATED FROM THIS
COMMAND CENTER ON THE GRAND
CANAL.
A SIREN IS FOLLOWED BY PITCHED
WHISTLES.
ONE WHISTLE MEANS ABOUT 12% OF
THE CITY WILL BE FLOODED, WATER
IS ANKLE DEEP, AND SHOPKEEPERS
BARRICADE THEIR DOORS.
TWO WHISTLES MEAN THE WATER WILL
BE HIGHER.
ALMOST ONE-THIRD OF THE CITY
WILL BE FLOODED.
>> THREE MEANS RUN FOR THE
HILLS, BECAUSE IT'S GOING TO BE
HIGH!
>> Reporter: VENETIANS GENERALLY
TAKE "ACQUA ALTA" IN STRIDE.
LIKE THE MANAGER OF THE GRAN
CAFFE LAVENA, MASSIMO MILANESE.
HE SHOWED US PICTURES OF HIS
CAFE DURING A RECENT FLOOD.
TABLES AND CHAIRS SITTING IN THE
WATER.
>> SEE THE SPECIAL DOOR HERE.
>> Reporter: LIKE OTHERS IN THE
PIAZZA, HE HAS FLOOD DOORS TO
PROTECT HIS BUSINESS.
HE TOOK US BEHIND THE CAFE,
WHERE THOSE FLOOD DOORS ARE
STORED.
SO THE WATER CAN ACTUALLY GET
THIS HIGH?
>> THE MAXIMUM THAT I SAW--
THIS.
>> Reporter: WHOA.
SO JUST A COUPLE OF INCHES MORE,
AND THIS WOULD HAVE BEEN
USELESS.
HE ALSO KEEPS WATERPROOF BOOTS
ON HAND FOR HIS EMPLOYEES.
ACQUA ALTA EVENTS ARE USUALLY
LESS THAN BOOT HIGH, LAST JUST A
FEW HOURS, AND THE CITY CLEANS
UP AND GOES BACK TO NORMAL.
BUT FLOODS ALSO EAT AWAY AT THE
SOFT, PERMEABLE BRICKS THAT SIT
ABOVE THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE
BUILDINGS.
OVER TIME, VENETIANS HAVE RAISED
THEIR DOORWAYS AND IN SOME CASES
ABANDONED THEIR GROUND FLOORS.
BUT THE FLOODING IS GETTING
WORSE AS THE WATER LEVEL IN THE
ADRIATIC SEA AND VENICE LAGOON
RISES DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
THE SEA LEVEL ALONE HAS RISEN
FIVE AND HALF INCHES SINCE 1900,
ACCORDING TO CITY OFFICIALS.
THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT DOES HAVE
A PLAN TO PROTECT VENICE.
IT'S CALLED THE MOSE PROJECT.
CONCEIVED IN THE 1970s, IT'S A
SERIES OF 78 UNDERWATER GATES
SECURED TO THE FLOOR OF THE
VENICE LAGOON.
DURING ESPECIALLY HIGH TIDES,
THEY WILL BE PUMPED WITH AIR AND
RISE TO THE SURFACE TO BLOCK
RISING WATER FROM REACHING THE
CITY.
FOUR GIANT BARRIERS ACROSS THREE
INLETS ARE SCHEDULED TO BE
OPERATIONAL BY 2019.
IS MOSE ABLE TO DEFEND VENICE?
>> YES, MOSE WILL BE ABLE TO
PROTECT THE CITY OF VENICE FROM
EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH WATER.
THAT MEANS WATER THAT EXCEEDS
3.5 FEET ABOVE SEA LEVEL.
>> Reporter: SO THIS IS WHAT THE
GATE LOOKS LIKE WHEN IT'S DOWN?
>> YES, THIS IS THE GATE WHEN IT
IS STANDING ON THE BOTTOM OF THE
INLET.
>> Reporter: DARIO BERTI IS
ENGINEERING AND PRODUCTION
MANAGER WITH THE COMPANY
BUILDING THE MOSE PROJECT.
CONSTRUCTION BEGAN IN 2003,
TESTING IN 2013.
IF THIS IS THE FIRST PROJECT OF
ITS KIND, HOW CAN YOU BE SO SURE
THAT IT'S GOING TO WORK?
>> WELL, THIS IS THE RESULT OF
YEARS AND YEARS OF PLANNING AND
EXPERIMENTS ON MODELS, TRIALS IN
TANKS.
IT'S BEEN TESTED IN ALL POSSIBLE
CONDITIONS.
SO, WE'RE CERTAIN IT WILL WORK.
>> ONE QUESTION ABOUT THE MOSE
PROJECT, THESE SEAWALLS, IS
WHETHER IT WILL BE EFFECTIVE?
>> Reporter: IF IT WILL BE
EFFECTIVE?
THEY'VE SPENT BILLIONS OF EUROS
ON IT.
SHOULDN'T IT BE EFFECTIVE?
>> YES, THE LATEST ESTIMATES ARE
BETWEEN $5 BILLION AND $6
BILLION EUROS HAVING BEEN SPENT
ON THIS PROJECT.
CERTAINLY A PORTION OF THAT
MONEY HAS NOT GONE TOWARDS THE
BUILDING OF THIS PROJECT BUT
RATHER TOWARDS PAYOFFS TO LOCAL
AND REGIONAL POLITICIANS AND
BUSINESS FOLK.
THREE YEARS AGO, ABOUT 35 OF OUR
LEADING CITIZENS WERE ARRESTED
ALONG WITH OUR MAYOR.
>> Reporter: THE MAYOR OF VENICE
WAS ARRESTED?
>> THE MAYOR OF VENICE WAS
ARRESTED AS WELL ON CHARGES OF
CORRUPTION CONNECTED TO THIS
PROJECT.
>> Reporter: A VERDICT ON THE
CASE OF THAT FORMER MAYOR IS
EXPECTED THIS FALL.
CONSIDERING THE CORRUPTION
SCANDALS, ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENTIST JANE DA MOSTO SAYS THE
ITALIAN GOVERNMENT SHOULD HAVE
GONE BACK AND REVIEWED THE
ENGINEERING AND SCIENTIFIC BASIS
FOR MOSE.
>> THERE HASN'T BEEN ANY KIND OF
TECHNICAL REVIEW ABOUT WHETHER
OR NOT THEY ARE DOING THE RIGHT
THING, AND THAT I DO FIND
SERIOUSLY ALARMING.
>> Reporter: DA MOSTO IS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF A
NONPROFIT GROUP CALLED "WE ARE
HERE VENICE," WHICH IS TRYING TO
RAISE AWARENESS OF THE
CHALLENGES FACING VENICE.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF CONCERN
AMONG VENETIANS THAT THE WORK AT
MOSE ISN'T BEING DONE PROPERLY?
>> IT'S NOT JUST AMONGST
VENETIANS.
ARTICLES HAVE BEEN PUBLISHED IN
NATIONAL NEWSPAPERS,
INTERNATIONAL JOURNALS.
THEY HAVE A PROBLEM ABOUT SAND
GOING INTO THE INDENTATIONS IN
THE LAGOON FLOOR, WHERE THE
PANELS THEN HAVE TO LIE BACK
DOWN AGAIN.
THEY FOUND THAT THE HINGES,
THEY'VE STARTED CORRODING MUCH
SOONER THAN THEY THOUGHT THEY
WOULD.
THEY ALSO KEEP DELAYING WHEN
THEY SAY IT'S GOING TO BE READY.
NOT A GOOD SIGN.
>> Reporter: MOSE ENGINEERS SAY
THEY ARE ADDRESSING THE ISSUES
OF SAND OBSTRUCTING THE BARRIERS
AND OF RUSTING HINGES.
BUT LUCA ZAGGIA, FROM THE
INSTITUTE OF MARINE SCIENCES
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL OF
ITALY, WARNS ASSUMING THEY WORK,
THERE'S A LIMIT TO HOW MANY
TIMES THE DEFENSIVE FLOOD
BARRIERS CAN BE DEPLOYED BEFORE
THEY DAMAGE THE LAGOON.
HOW MANY TIMES CAN YOU RAISE THE
FLOOD BARRIERS IN A YEAR?
>> WE SAY TEN TIMES A YEAR IS
THE BEST AMOUNT.
MAYBE 15 OR 20, BUT NO MORE.
>> Reporter: BUT THE CLIMATE IS
CHANGING, THE WATER LEVEL IS
RISING.
WHAT HAPPENS 20 YEARS FROM NOW,
30 YEARS FROM NOW?
IS THAT STILL GOING STILL TO BE
THE CASE?
>> NO. SURE.
WE WILL CLOSE MORE FREQUENTLY.
UP 100 TIMES A YEAR.
>> Reporter: 100 TIMES A YEAR?
WHAT IS THAT GOING TO DO TO THE
LAGOON?
>> IT WILL BE A TERRIBLE
DISASTER FOR THE ECOSYSTEM.
STAGNATION FIRST AND THEN
CONTAMINATION AND GROWTH OF
MICROALGAE.
>> Reporter: IT SOUNDS VERY
HARMFUL.
>> YEAH, IT IS.
YOU CAN HAVE MASSIVE DEATHS OF
FISHES IN SUMMER.
>> Reporter: MOST TOURISTS ARE
OBLIVIOUS TO THE BARRIER SYSTEM
AND SERIOUSNESS OF THE FLOODING
PROBLEM.
THEY ARE BUSY TAKING SELFIES,
MARVELING AT THE BEAUTY OF THIS
CAR-FREE CITY, OR TRYING TO
ESCAPE FROM THE SUMMER HEAT,
LIKE THESE TOURISTS FROM IRELAND
WE FOUND IN THE SHADE OF THE
TOWER IN PIAZZA SAN MARCO.
THEY HAD NO IDEA, UNTIL WE TOLD
THEM, THIS PLAQUE MARKS THE
HISTORIC FLOOD OF 1966, WHEN THE
WATER LEVEL WAS SO HIGH, THEIR
CHILDREN WOULD HAVE BEEN NECK
DEEP.
>> Reporter: THE 25 MILLION
TOURISTS WHO VISIT EVERY YEAR
ARE ACTUALLY ANOTHER MAJOR
THREAT TO VENICE.
SOUVENIR SHOPS AND HIGH-END
BOUTIQUES CATERING TO THEM HAVE
REPLACED VEGETABLE STANDS,
HARDWARE STORES, AND OTHER SHOPS
NECESSARY FOR DAILY LIFE.
HOUSING PRICES HAVE SOARED WITH
SPECULATORS BUYING UP PROPERTY
TO RENT TO TOURISTS.
AS A RESULT, VENETIANS ARE
MOVING AWAY.
AT THE END WORLD WAR TWO, THERE
WERE 150,000 FULL-TIME RESIDENTS
OF VENICE.
NOW, THERE ARE ONLY 54,000.
ON SOME DAYS, THERE ARE ACTUALLY
MORE TOURISTS THAN RESIDENTS,
AND THAT UPSETS VENETIANS LIKE
MATTEO SECCHI.
>> THE VENETIAN WAY OF LIFE IS
AT RISK, SIMPLY BECAUSE WE'RE
VANISHING.
THERE'S ALWAYS FEWER OF US.
WE'RE LOSING OUR CULTURE.
BECAUSE WHEN A VENETIAN LEAVES
THE CITY, HE DOESN'T JUST LEAVE
THE CITY, HE LEAVES A WAY OF
LIFE AND CULTURE.
>> Reporter: IN THIS FRAGILE
CITY, SOME RESIDENTS SAY HUGE
TOURIST CRUISE SHIPS ARE MAKING
MATTERS WORSE.
TOMMASO CACCIARI IS THE FOUNDER
OF THE GROUP "NO GRANDI NAVI,"
MEANING "NO LARGE SHIPS."
IT WANTS TO BAN LARGE CRUISE
SHIPS FROM ENTERING THE VENICE
LAGOON.
>> THERE'S A MASS AMOUNT OF
WATER THAT PUSHES BACK AND
FORTH.
IT'S CALLED SIPHONING.
IT'S LIKE AN ACCORDION THAT
SUCKS THE FOUNDATION OF THE
CITY.
THERE'S NO CONCRETE UNDER HERE.
THERE'S MUD, SOFT MATERIAL THAT
GETS SUCKED OUT.
>> Reporter: THIS PIER, HE SAYS,
REBUILT SEVEN YEARS AGO, IS
ALREADY SHOWING SIGNS OF DAMAGE
FROM THE CRUISE SHIPS.
WHEN THEY PASS BY, THEY CREATE
THIS HUGE PRESSURE THAT
BASICALLY SUCKS THE SEDIMENT OUT
FROM UNDERNEATH US AND ACTUALLY
LOWERS THE FOUNDATION.
YOU CAN SEE IT REALLY RIGHT
BEFORE YOUR EYES HERE WITH THESE
BRICKS HERE.
THE CRUISE SHIPS EMPLOY FIVE
THOUSAND VENETIANS, BUT THE
VENICE PORT AUTHORITY SAYS ONLY
ABOUT A QUARTER OF THEIR
PASSENGERS GET OFF THEM AND
SPEND MONEY IN THE CITY.
REINING IN THE SHIPS AND THE
TOURISTS IS ONE CHALLENGE HUMANS
CAN CONTROL.
CONTROLLING THE SEAS IS NOT.
WHICH IS WHY MARINE SCIENTIST
LUCA ZAGGIA IS PUTTING HIS FAITH
IN THE MOSE PROJECT TO SAVE
VENICE FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS.
SO THE SYSTEM MUST WORK.
THE ALTERNATIVE IS WHAT?
>> THE SYSTEM MUST WORK.
WE HAVE NO ALTERNATIVES AT THIS
POINT.
IT HAS TO WORK.